# lecture 2: memory and stuff
## unitialized memory, buffer overflow

when you create an array like so:
```c
char name[8];
```
You allocate 8 bytes on the stack. 

* Technically, `name` would only be able to hold 7 characters because the last index is reserved for the null terminating byte (`'\0'`).
* Recall that the stack is for statically allocated memory, and the heap is for dynamically allocated memory.

What would the output look like if we were to print `name`? 

Since `name` is uninitialized, we never assigned any value to it. The output would maybe have garbage data, maybe have nothing, or maybe even break out terminal output.

Now, if we were to read in from `stdin` to `name` like this:
```c
printf( "Enter your name:\n" );
scanf( "%s", name );
printf( "Hello, %s.\n", name );
```
You would only be able to read the first "word", that is, you will only read from `stdin` until you see a space character: the input `abcdefg hijk lmno pqrs` would only read in `abcdefg` and the rest would still be in the input - if there were more `scanf` calls, they would be immediately filled with `hijk`, `lmno`, and `pqrs`. 

How do we fix this?

##### Pattern matching
`scanf` supports simple pattern matching, where you can declare the beginning and end of a pattern with the square brackets (`[]`) characters. In our case, if we want to read in one line at a time instead of one word at a time, our pattern would be `"[^\n]"`. The `^` character is used to denote a wildcard, and `\n` means newline. This basically says "match anything that has a newline at the end", which is what we want.
Now, `scanf` with our pattern matching:
```c
scanf( "%[^\n]s", name );
```
Note that we still have the % and s, because we are still trying to read a string but just want to match a specific pattern.


There is a point of failure for `scanf` with statically allocated memory, with something called buffer overflow:
Since the size of `name` is only 8 bytes, what if we type something that is more than it can hold?
Something like this would happen:
```
Enter your name: 12345678910
Hello 12345678910
*** stack smashing detected ***: terminated
zsh: IOT instruction (core dumped)  ./a.out
```

We can fix this by dynamically allocating memory for name instead, by doing this:
```c
char* name;
printf( "Enter your name:\n" );
scanf( "%ms", &name );
printf( "Hello, %s.\n", name );
free( name );
```
On the first line, you can see that instead of directly allocating memory for `name`, we just declare a pointer (which is on the stack) that we can use later.
On the `scanf`, you can see that we have `%ms` for the thing to scan - the `m` means to dynamically allocate memory for `name`, which is why we need the `free` call at the end of our code. This way, we will not run into a buffer overflow.

## fgets

Another way to read input is to use the `fgets` function. `fgets` will handle buffer overflow for us, and flushes the input buffer afterwards. Flushing the input buffer means that subsequent reads from `stdin` will not be immediately filled.

Here is an example of `fgets` with error handling:
```c
char name[32];
printf( "Enter your name:\n" );
if ( fgets( name, 32, stdin ) == NULL ) {
	fprintf( "ERROR: fgets() failed\n" );
	return EXIT_FAILURE;
}
printf( "Hello, %s!\n", name );

```

You can see that `fgets` takes in 3 arguments: the buffer to read data in, the maximum length of the buffer, and the input stream. 